---
layout: post
title:  "Burrows"
date:   2020-03-22 00:00:00 -0500
minute: 2
tag: essay
---
You would think that now that the world has come to a halt, I would find
more time to write. But, quite to the contrary, I've been having trouble
reading, let alone writing. It's near impossible for my mind not to
wander off after a few pages; the lizard part of my brain deems it much
more important to ceaselessly track the increasing number of COVID cases
than it is to contemplate the labyrinthine work of Kafka.

I certainly haven't made it easy for myself with my choice of reading
material; Kafka's work oozes with the paranoid, hypochondriac anxiety
that I've had far too much of in the past days. I'm halfway through The
Burrow, which describes the psychological torture that a burrowing
animal endures, knowing that no matter how carefully concieved and
constructed their home is, the looming dangers of the outside are always
on the verge of seeping through the cracks. As I wash my hands for the
fourteenth time in a day, I can't help but picture the burrowing
creature slamming their furry head against the earth to form the walls
of their tunnel.

The global mandate of social distancing has forced me to confront the
substance of my own burrow: a bed pushed up into a corner by the window,
a decaying office chair, a faux mahogany desk, an electric guitar, and a
shelf of unopened books. What exactly is it that I'm building a bulwark
against? What sort of den have I made myself? What subterranean
creatures do I think might burst through my floorboards? It seems the
unopened books may give the biggest clue.

The indictment Kafka makes seems clear. These constructed signifiers of
the life I've attempted to design have themselves become a prison. I
should leave behind these impositions of modernity and search for the
authentic, unstructured life. As the burrowing creature notes at one
point, it seems happier to live in an open field of danger than it is to
become pathologically fixated on certain particular dangers.

And yet to take The Burrow as a cautionary tale would seem inappropriate
in these times. I live not in a burrow but in a warren, populated by
multitudes. Every person I pass on the street opens up the inside of
their home to me; a careless gesture on my part could shatter the life
they have constructed. Thus, to be a hypochondriac is to be noble, and
to take hold of life's pleasures or dangers is to betray the warren.
Perhaps that is the true horror of postmodernity: in being connected to
everyone and everything, we become responsible for everyone and
everything. The pursuit of an authentic life in the liberal tradition is
no longer possible, if it were ever possible at all.

Of course, I don't yet know how this story ends. From its trajectory, I
would venture to guess that the last pages will feature the compacted
earthen walls collapsing so that the outside rushes ruthlessly inward. I
hope that my instincts are wrong. I'll keep you updated.
